[RFC] Dune integration with `library` and `executable` stanzas (#200)
melange-re/melange: docs/rfcs/0001-integration-with-dune.md

- Start Date: 2021-05-31
- RFC PR: https://github.com/melange-re/melange/pull/200

# Summary

To allow Melange users to leverage Dune `library` and `executable` stanzas as
it is currently possible with any other OCaml project.

# Basic example

Dune would allow to use Melange as another cross-compiler, e.g.

```dune
(context (default (targets (melange))))
```

Then, users would be able to define `library` and `executable` stanzas that

> would be built by calling Melange binary `ocamlc`. To define the output format

Reviewer: I'm not a big fan of calling the binary `ocamlc`, we're using in hacking `ocamlc` because it's already setup by dune, but it makes things really confusing.

Author: Hm I'm confused. If we don't use `ocamlc`, then what's the point of defining melange through cross-compilation?

Reviewer: Because the dependencies are different, the advantage of the cross compiler workflow is important because you want two dependency set, one for melange and another one for native.

Of course there is some other ways to separate the deps, but this is a deeper problem and the current solution by dune is having multiple findlib.conf.d

and extension, a new stanza `melange` would be supported in `dune` files:
```dune
(executable
    (name foo)

>     (modes melange)

Reviewer: This could also be inferred from the context, if a context has only `ocamlc` and it's a melange "ocamlc" all executables in this context must have `(modes melange)`

Author: > and it's a melange "ocamlc" 

how can Dune know this from just context? I thought from Dune perspective it's "just another" OCaml compiler installation.

>     (melange (module es6) (suffix bs.js))

Reviewer: Really nice

Author: I'm not sure tbh 😅 ideally i'd like to couple module and suffix together, with a kind of list of tuples like `(es6, bs.js)` but idk how to express this in dune s-expr language.

Reviewer: I think we should require an executable per target, the executable may be just a noop wrapper, all the `cmj` will already be shared between each target anyway.

```lisp
(executable (name app_esm) (melange (module esm) (suffix js)) (libraries app))
(executable (name app_cjs) (melange (module cjs) (suffix bs.js)) (libraries app))
```

)
```

# Motivation

The main motivations are:

- Improve integration with existing projects with OCaml and Melange sources: by
adding first-class support for Melange in Dune, it becomes easier to configure
projects that share libraries between OCaml native and Melange targets.
- Improve build performance of Melange projects: the current way Melange defines
all rules explicitly adds some overhead to build process, which could be removed
if Melange was exposed as any other OCaml compiler. 

# Detailed design

Unlike Js_of_ocaml, `.cmo` artifacts generated by Melange can't be shared with
the default `native` environment, as Melange does not transform bytecode, but
starts to translate to JavaScript from [the lambda representation](https://dev.realworldocaml.org/compiler-backend.html).
So the least intrusive way to model Melange and Dune integration is to leverage
Dune's existing support for cross-compilation.

Changes required in Melange:

- expose `bsc` as `ocamlc`

> - generate `cmo` files instead of `cmj` files

Reviewer: As we're introducing this new mode, such thing is not needed and it's better to have our own file names

Author: I see. I thought reusing `cmo` would require less changes in Dune, if we are going to leverage cross compilation in any case. But if this will make things more confusing, I guess we can generate both (although it'd be a bit wasteful from perf perspective?)

Reviewer 2: They contain different things so there's not much that can be reused anyway. Adding `cmj` support shouldn't be too hard. We keep extensions fairly centralized in dune.

After [some recent changes](https://github.com/melange-re/melange/pull/199),
[@EduardoRFS](https://github.com/EduardoRFS) unlocked the possibility to
generate `js` files from `cmo` files, which allows to define `cmo` and `js`
artifacts with separate Dune rules. This allows to generate just `cmo` files
first:

```bash
ocamlc -o output.cmo -bs-stop-after-cmo -impl output.ml
```

And then generate `js` files:

```bash
ocamlc -o output.js output.cmo
```

One remaining question is how to resolve the `import` / `require` statements in
resulting JavaScript files, as they require knowledge about the relative paths
to each one of the dependent modules that a module depends on.

Right now, Melange [checks if the `js` file exist in the relative path](https://github.com/jchavarri/melange/blob/6524091f126ec720f7fb59873d18bdff9b001be2/jscomp/core/js_name_of_module_id.ml#L175) to get absolute paths to dependent modules, so in
order to solve the issue we could include both `cmo` and `js` paths when calling
`ocamlc`:
```bash
ocamlc -I where_your_cm_stuff_is -I where_your_js_is exe.cmo
```

But there might better approaches, like passing all load paths to dependencies

> from the command line argument.

Reviewer: This would be kind of ugly but it would also lead to a overall simpler build pipeline for the compiler. We should still support the `-I` tho.

# Drawbacks

From users perspective, integration with Dune means that in-source compilation

> would no longer be supported. This has upsides like more easily shareable

Reviewer: That's not needed we could use promote mode for users who would like to have in source JS.

```js
(melange (auto_promote true))
```

Author: This is an awesome idea, I will update the rfc to include this config + behavior.

artifacts or caching, and removes the chances of accidentally committing build
artifacts under source control. But it can also make harder to configure certain
projects that require `js` assets to be co-locating with other assets like `css`
or images. This can be solved by using Dune copy rules.

Another downside is that this integration will add maintenance burden to Dune,
as it adds more modes, and expands the amount of use cases that need to be
supported. This is partially mitigated by leveraging cross-compilation.

It similarly adds more maintenance costs to Melange, which would need to support

> both `bsconfig.json` workflow, as well as `dune` workflow.

Reviewer: I would vote for slowly deprecating bsb, having a proper tool to migrate from bsconfig to dune, it shouldn't be hard just a bit of `(wrapped false)` and then we keep this in maintenance for some well known time, like 6-12 months.

Maybe moving bsb fully to userspace it's a first step.

> Finally, internal changes in Melange implementation to support Dune might make
> harder to incorporate upstream ReScript changes to Melange.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, internal changes in Melange implementation to support Dune might make
harder to incorporate build system changes from ReScript in Melange.
```
